Add scientific data and geospatial publishing guides & case study (#2243)
ipfs/ipfs-docs: docs/how-to/publish-geospatial-data.md

- **Chunked by default**: Arrays split into small chunks let you download only the subset you need.
- **Consolidated metadata**: All metadata in a single `zarr.json` file speeds reads for multi-array data sets.

> **Note:** For a more elaborate explanation on the underlying principles and motivation for Zarr, check out [this blog post](https://tom-nicholas.com/blog/2025/cloud-optimized-scientific-data/), by one of the Zarr contributors.

**IPFS** complements Zarr with decentralized distribution:

- **Content addressing**: Data is identified by what it contains using CIDs, not where it's stored
- **Built-in integrity**: Cryptographic hashes verify data hasn't been corrupted or tampered with
- **Participatory sharing**: Anyone can help distribute data sets they've downloaded
- **Open access**: No vendor lock-in or centralized infrastructure required

This combination has proven effective in real-world campaigns like [Orcestra](https://orcestra-campaign.org/orcestra.html), where scientists collaborated with limited internet connectivity in the field while sharing data globally.

## Prerequisites

Before starting, ensure you have:

> - A Zarr data set for

Reviewer: Fragment?

> - [Kubo](/install/command-line/) or [IPFS Desktop](/install/ipfs-desktop/) installed on a machine with a public IP

Author: Yeah this is a gap that is best addressed by a new command in Kubo rather than a guide (because to test this you need some external node checking that you are in fact reachable). 

I opened https://github.com/ipfs/kubo/issues/11171 to address this.

To calculate chunk dimensions for a target byte size, work backwards from your datatype:

```python
import xarray as xr

ds = xr.open_dataset(filename)
# Example: targeting ~1 MB chunks with float32 data
ds.to_zarr('output.zarr', encoding={
    'var_name': {'chunks': (1, 512, 512)}
})

# Total size: 1 × 512 × 512 × 4 bytes (float32) = ~1 MB per chunk
```

## Step 2: Add Your Data Set to IPFS

Add your Zarr folder to IPFS using the `ipfs add` command:

```bash
ipfs add --recursive \
         --hidden \
         --raw-leaves \
         --chunker=size-1048576 \
         --cid-version=1 \
         --pin-name="halo-measurements-2026-01-23" \
         --quieter \
         ./my-dataset.zarr
```

This command:

1. **Merkleizes** the folder: converts files and directories into content-addressed blocks with UnixFS
2. **Pins** the data locally: prevents garbage collection from removing it
3. **Queues providing**: announces to the IPFS network that your node has this data
4. **Outputs the root CID**: the identifier for your entire dataset

The `--quieter` flag outputs only the root CID, which identifies the complete dataset.

> > **Note:**

Reviewer 2: Empty note, I guess it's some left-over.

### Step 3: Organizing Your Data

Two options help manage multiple data sets on your node:

**Named pins** (`--pin-name`): Label data sets for easy identification in `ipfs pin ls`.

**MFS (Mutable File System)**: Create a human-readable directory structure for your CIDs:

```bash
ipfs add ... --to-files=/datasets/halo-measurements-2026-01-23
```

MFS gives you a familiar filesystem interface to organize content-addressed data.

## Step 4: Verify Providing Status

After adding, Kubo continuously announces your content to the network. Check the status:

```bash
ipfs stats provide
```

For detailed diagnostics, see the [provide system documentation](https://github.com/ipfs/kubo/blob/master/docs/provide-stats.md).

## Step 5: Content Discovery

> Users need a way to discover your datasets. Choose an approach based on your needs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that your data is available on the public network, the next step is making it discoverable to others. Choose a sharing approach based on your needs:
```

### Option A: Share the CID Directly

For one-off sharing, provide the CID directly:

```
ipfs://bafybeif52irmuurpb27cujwpqhtbg5w6maw4d7zppg2lqgpew25gs5eczm
```

### Option B: Use IPNS for Updatable References

IPNS provides a stable identifier that you can update when datasets change:

```bash
# Publish your dataset under your node's IPNS key
ipfs name publish /ipfs/<your-dataset-cid>

# Update to a new version later
ipfs name publish /ipfs/<new-dataset-cid>
```

> Users can subscribe to your IPNS name to always get the latest version.

Author: Good point. We don't have a subscribe function. I'll update to reflect that.

### Option C: Use DNSLink for Human-Readable URLs

Link a DNS name to your content by adding a TXT record:

```
_dnslink.data.example.org  TXT  "dnslink=/ipfs/<cid>"
```

Users can then access your data at:

```
https://data.example.org.ipfs.dweb.link/
```

## Accessing Published Data

Once published, users can access your Zarr datasets through multiple methods:

**IPFS HTTP Gateways**:

See the [retrieval guide](../quickstart/retrieve.md)

**Python with ipfsspec**:

```python
import xarray as xr

ds = xr.open_dataset(
    "ipfs://bafybeif52irmuurpb27cujwpqhtbg5w6maw4d7zppg2lqgpew25gs5eczm",
    engine="zarr"

> )

Reviewer 2: A link to ipfsspec would be good.
For those (like me) that aren't that familiar with fsspec, it might be good to add a comment in the code like ```# after the installation of ipfsspec, `ipfs://` urls are automatically recognized```

Author: Addressed
